good afternoon i'm joined today by
professor stephen paris
uh national medical director of nhs
england
the average number of new cases each day
is now
22 524 compared to 22 thousand
three hundred ninety eight a week ago
there are now
fourteen thousand one hundred and ninety
six covet patients in hospitals across
the uk
compared to twelve thousand four hundred
and six a week ago
1 219 patients are now
in mechanical ventilation beds compared
to 1142
a week ago and sadly another 595
deaths within 28 days of a positive test
were reported
yesterday the seven day average daily
number of deaths each day in the uk
within 28 days of a positive test by
date reported
is now 375 up
from 295 a week ago
our thoughts are very much with the
families and loved ones
of those who've lost their lives which
is a reminder to us
as to why we are taking the action we
are to
stop the spread of this virus and
ultimately save
lives today we're also reminded about
the vital importance
of fighting this virus to protect our
economy
while the economy grew by 15 percent in
the third quarter
it slowed in september and remains 8.2
below where we were in february
we in government understand acutely
the human impact this statistic
represents
its jobs livelihoods and families
affected so we will continue to support
businesses
now and as they recover the government
has provided unprecedented levels of
support for businesses
over the past eight months to date that
represents over
200 billion pounds in support
this is one of the most generous and
comprehensive packages
of financial support provided in the
world
which the international monetary fund
has praised
just this month we have announced an
extension of the self-employed grant
scheme to march
next year an extension of the furlough
scheme at eighty percent
until the spring cash grants of up to
three thousand pounds
per month for businesses in england
which are required to be closed
due to this month's national
restrictions these
will benefit six hundred thousand
business premises
and i can confirm today that we will be
distributing 2.2 billion pounds
to local authorities tomorrow to allow
them to make these vital grant payments
the businesses which have been affected
all of these measures
are designed to preserve jobs and help
businesses
stay afloat today we have
also announced that more than 19 000
jobs have been created
so far through our kickstart scheme
these jobs are spread across the country
and in a variety of sectors
i know how hard this job market is
particularly for young job seekers
hoping to enter the workplace
for the first time the kickstart scheme
is a ray of hope
for young people and i want to thank all
the businesses which have stepped up to
participate
in this scheme i speak to businesses
every day and i can see that despite the
tough times
they are determined to soldier through
this
through sheer hard work innovation
resilience
and invoking a real community spirit
across the united kingdom
for example in aberdeenshire brewdog has
made hand sanitizer
to protect our frontline nhs staff in
belfast
axial 3d has helped develop thousands of
new ventilators
in surrey carousel lights have adapted
their manufacturing processes
to produce sneeze screens for gp
surgeries
pharmacies and care homes in carefili
transcend packaging has converted
production lines to create ppe
almost doubling their workforce in just
four months
because despite the government support
and when
it comes down to it it is you who are
keeping
the country going you who are powering
our
economic recovery just as our brilliant
scientists and researchers are powering
ahead
in the race to discover a safe and
effective vaccine
a little over six months ago i stood
here and announced the creation of the
vaccines task force
a team of industry experts scientists
and civil servants
with one mission to secure a vaccine
to beat down this virus since then
we have secured access to 350 million
doses
through agreements on six the leading
vaccine candidates in the world
the task force has demonstrated how we
can work together
at pace business and science the nhs and
local communities
together forging a path out of this
predicament
but although this week's announcement on
the fisa biontech vaccine is potentially
very good news
we still have a lot of hurdles to
overcome before we can be certain of its
safety and efficacy
so we must ensure that we continue to
follow
the guidance to protect our loved ones
our families
our friends our communities because the
virus is still there
it is still a danger so we must not
lose our resolve now we must keep
focused
to protect the health of the nation and
the health
of the economy working together
supporting each other we will get
through this we will come out the other
side
stronger more resilient and more united
i'm going to pass over to professor
pause to take us us through the slide
thank you alec um i'd like to start by
thanking all of the
all of you who are following the latest
restrictions
i know it's not easy just how difficult
it is especially the second time around
but sadly the number of patients in
hospital with coronavirus is still
rising as is shown in the single slide
that i'll be showing today
you'd have seen this slide before we've
updated it to yesterday
and it shows covid19 hospital inpatients
in england
as you can see over the summer those
numbers were low but as we have moved
into the autumn through september
and october and into november numbers
have been rising
indeed when i he appeared here at a
press conference exactly one month ago
on the 12th of october that number
stood at 3827 but as you can see
one month later yesterday the figure
is just above 12 700.
as we know that a number will
unfortunately continue to rise
if infection rates could continue to
increase in our communities
and sadly while treatments and therapies
have indeed improved
more infections inevitably also mean
more deaths
and more people suffering from the
debilitating effects of long cobit
now this week we've had the extremely
encouraging news concerning
a potential covet vaccine and in the nhs
we're preparing to deliver that vaccine
it might feel like the cavalry is coming
and we can relax about the restrictions
but it's vital that we continue to do
two things that will reduce the spread
of the virus and help save lives
firstly we can all personally limit
transmission by washing hands wearing
masks
and keeping an appropriate distance from
each other that is what the restrictions
are designed to do
we know these measures work so don't
stop
now keep going because frankly every
time you wash your hands
you keep your distance you wear a mask
you could be preventing
passing the virus to a loved one to a
neighbor or to someone you work with
and secondly of course i'd urge
everybody with symptoms to come forward
to get tested
and self-isolate when they come into
contact with anyone
who is tested positive both these
measures will
slow the growth in infections that will
inevitably lead to increased hospital
admissions
and sadly increased debts there is hope
on the horizon with a vaccine and of
course that is welcome
news but the vaccine's not here yet
and it will not help us in this second
wave if infections continue to rise
that's why it's vital that we all
continue to follow all of the guidelines
are getting a vaccine so rapidly to this
point as you've heard
is a major scientific achievement and
and i think it's
an unprecedenting unprecedented
achievement and
personally i applaud all those
scientists everybody who has been
involved
in the development and the continuing
development of the many vaccines
that are being developed but today i'd
like to end by especially thanking
everybody who has taken part
in the trials that have been ongoing
whether it's the recovery trial here in
the uk which has
helped the nhs show the world that
dexamethasone is a successful treatment
for covid uh or those who've taken part
in the clinical vaccine trials for covid
and indeed continue
to do so all of you who have done this
have selflessly put yourselves forward
for the greater good of all of us and
your actions i'm absolutely convinced
will ultimately help save lives so a big
thank you
for me and everybody working in the nhs
alec thanks steve i think we'll now go
to questions from the public
first uh we have a a video uh
for chris from chris from reading
good evening in light of the fisa and
biotech announcement
of a development of a vaccine that is 90
effective
can the government now inform the public
how this and other vaccines will be
rolled out across the uk
in 2021 thank you very much
great well thank you chris uh for that
question of course uh incredibly
pertinent
at this point uh as we've uh heard about
the developments on
the the fisa bound tech vaccine um
we have the independent uh joint
committee on vaccinations immunizations
uh which uh decides uh in terms of
tiering in terms of uh who will get
access
to the vaccine first uh i'll ask for
surpass to
perhaps uh talk also about uh how we're
going to deploy this
but i think that the key issue is making
sure that those who are most at risk
most
vulnerable uh who get access to the
vaccine first
i think very very many people across the
country will absolutely
understand that it is about protecting
the vulnerable about protecting people's
loved ones
but steve do you want to add anything
yes so as i've said chris
a huge achievement uh to get to the
point uh this week so
so quickly in that this pandemic that a
potential vaccine is available
clearly we need to see the data from the
clinical trials
the usual regulatory mechanisms that
that uh
are gone through for any new drug or new
treatment will be gone through once they
are available
and then it will be the task to deploy
that vaccine
so of course in the nhs we have been
working incredibly hard to prepare
ourselves for this
we are very good at vaccine programs we
undertake flu vaccination every winter
indeed we are well into flu vaccination
uh
time of year and our gps and community
pharmacies have been doing a tremendous
job
ensuring that those that need the flu
vaccine get it this year
so we have the systems in place all
ready to build on to deliver a flu
vaccine
so our general practitioners our
community pharmacies
but also we will be looking at other
channels other ways of getting
a vaccine to people so that might be
vaccination centers for example
uh we will be saying more about this in
the weeks to come
once we know a bit more about the
vaccine
uh about the way it needs to be handled
once the regulatory approvals
have been uh gone through so we will set
all of that out
but uh we are working uh incredibly hard
and i'm confident the nhs
will be up to to what will be a huge
logistical challenge
but we have done this we can done this
with flu every year
we will be able to do it with kovid
steve thanks very much
i think we now have a question from
laura from sheffield
so laura from sheffield asks if the
current restrictions
end on the 2nd of december do we go back
into the area tier we are currently in
or will it be reassessed um so laura
thank you very much for your question
we made it very clear that the national
restrictions will come to an
end on the 2nd of december and then we
will move
back into the tiering system i think
what's important right now
is exactly as professor powers has said
that we observe the rules we've
observed the guidance and do the basics
to protect ourselves
uh wash your hands cover your face uh
maintain social distance
and of course as we get to the second of
december uh the prime minister will set
out
more details but uh the restrictions
national registrations will be coming to
an end on the second
of december thank you uh for that
question laura i think we now go to
questions from the media and i think the
first question is from sophie
hutchinson from the bbc sophie hi
um questions for both of you professor
powis to start with
how concerned are you about this very
dramatic jump in the number of
covid19 cases that we've seen in today's
figures
do you think these people were infected
just before the lockdown and do you
think it was a mistake to allow
a number of days between the
announcement of the lockdown
and its actual start and a question for
the business secretary
can you be sure that the disruption from
brexit will not
interfere with the supply chain for the
vaccine
shall i i'll take the first point then
sophie so um i think the first point i'd
make of course
is as you know it's important to look at
the number of cases reported over a
number of days and not just take one day
in isolation
and as you've heard earlier the seven
day rolling average is just above 22
000 so uh important not to focus just on
a single day because of the way test and
trace works
the second thing of course there is
other data to look at the office for
national statistics has been
looking at a coveted infections in in a
segment of the population every week it
will report again i'm sure tomorrow
and the react study which is a similar
study from imperial college has been
doing the same
so i think again don't look a single day
and don't look at a single data set
those data sets in particular are going
to be very important
because they're not affected by some of
the uh
uh things around test and trace around
who comes forward
the the ons and the react data data sets
uh look at people essentially randomly
selected throughout the population
but it's clear that infection rates have
been going up as i've shown you
and what's really important is to get
those infection rates down
that's what will reduce debts it's what
will reduce the
pressure on hospitals uh and it's what
will prevent the long-term effects of
covert such as
long-covered so the real key thing about
the data
is is to emphasize the importance of all
of us
complying with the restrictions driving
the r below one
and getting those infection rates down
again
uh sophie to your question on our future
relationship with the eu
as you know those talks are continuing
uh as the prime minister said there is a
deal to be done
um but i think it's also important to
emphasize is that
whatever form of deal we we end up with
uh with the the european union
there aren't going to be changes for
businesses uh
and i have been writing my department
has been writing on a weekly basis to
hundreds of thousands of businesses
uh making them aware of individual areas
where they're going to have to have a
look and see whether they're ready for
the end of transition so that may be
in terms of custom clearances it may be
how they're looking to employ people who
are currently working in the european
union
issues around work permits if they're
going to go and work in the european
union
all of these issues i think businesses
of course
will want to address and we've been
holding webinars on a sector basis
uh with businesses very very many
thousands of businesses signing up for
those
working with business representative
organizations so they can cascade
information down to the millions of
members they have
and also proactively as a department
indeed across government
contacting and talking to businesses who
need to get ready
and i want to thank all the businesses
the very many businesses across our
country
who are making every effort to make sure
that they're ready for transition
and of course we will continue to work
with you we will continue to support
with you
support you and make sure that post
transition
uh we are also ready for the
opportunities that will come thank you
very much
for that uh questions uh sophie uh we
now move to
dan hewitt at itv dan
thank you a question first of all to the
business secretary and on the day we
again learnt the
scale of the economic cost being caused
by this pandemic a number of your own
conservative mps are very concerned on
what's going on in size
number 10 following the resignation of
lee kay and the pm's director of
communications tory mps roger gale
says it's extraordinary and unacceptable
that downing street should allow itself
to be distracted by internal squabbles
what is your message to him and other
concerned mps and the question if i may
to professor paris um do you regret
stopping routine surgery too early in
the first wave and resuming it
too late and will you apologize to those
hundreds of thousands of people
who are still waiting for treatment uh
dan thank you for that question
i'll take the first one um so i can tell
you that all of us in government
are focused on one thing which is
protecting lives and protecting
livelihoods
and i've set out some of the measures
that we've taken in terms of
extending the the photo scheme uh
protecting millions of jobs extending
the
uh self employment scheme uh
and that again protecting so far uh 2.6
million
uh jobs through that and indeed all the
all the grants and other support that we
have provided um
and we will continue to do that that is
what
uh people watching this press conference
your viewers
will expect the government to do to make
sure that we are providing support for
them
and continue to put our arms around them
at what is a really very very difficult
time
for lots of businesses where people will
be concerned and worried about their
jobs about their livelihoods
about their families and it is right and
proper that as a government we step
forward
and provide that support and we will
continue to do so
steve do you want to take a second yes
thank you dan so of course back in march
we
were at the very start of this pandemic
we could see
infection rates hospitalizations rising
incredibly rapidly much more rapidly
than they are
in the autumn yeah even and of course we
could see around europe as well
health systems coming under tremendous
pressure so northern italy was a
good example uh from those high
infection rates
uh testing was more limited so we had
less information about uh
exactly where where the virus was and
and for all those reasons it was
absolutely critical
uh that we were able to create the
capacity uh in the nhs to deal with that
wave of infections
not knowing how large it was going to be
and in fact not knowing how the public
would respond
to the measures that were being put in
place by the government of course they
responded magnificently we know that
so it was right that we that we ensured
that the nhs was ready for that
we had the capacity of course we had the
nightingales on top
but of course we don't want people we
don't want to step down
elective surgery where it's all possible
and indeed that's why
in the second wave this autumn we
haven't done that
we are keeping elective care going
our clinicians have done a fantastic job
over the summer are beginning to catch
up cancer work is back where it was last
year
there is more work to do and of course
the key thing here is
as infection rates rise and hospitals
come under pressure we've seen that in
areas of the country
with high community rates then once
again
there is a possibility that that
elective care gets
gets affected and and our staff don't
want that to happen
uh our staff want to get on treat people
who are on waiting lists and to make
sure that those waiting lists uh
come down and of course you know we're
we're all sorry that people have been
affected in this way none of us
as clinicians none of us as managers
want this to happen we want to get on
and treat people the public can help us
with this task
so it's the same message again but it's
it's absolutely true that if we
collectively as the public once again
as we did in the spring keep to the
guidance drive down infection rates then
that is the best way to ensure
that the nhs can do what it always does
which is to
treat everybody with covid people who
don't have covid
ensure that those waiting times don't
increase and that we can get on
and manage the backlog there isn't a
clinician
in the land that doesn't want to do that
we will
absolutely do our best for our patients
and the public can help us uh by doing
uh
their best too great thanks steve thanks
dan for the for the question
we're now going to sam coats at sky
samhain
hello secretary of state we've seen
turbulence
in downing street this week things seem
fluid
who should president-elect joe biden's
chief of staff
call in downing street if he has an
urgent issue
to discuss and professor powers with the
uk's failure to strike a trade deal with
the eu
make any difference at all to the uk's
ability to source coronavirus vaccine
doses
sam let me let me take that uh that
question from from you um
so the first thing i would say to you is
that as you know the prime minister has
had
a very positive call with
president-elect biden
and uh he's congratulated him of course
congratulated
uh the vice president-elect uh who uh
with her background and also
the fact uh that she will be the first
uh female uh vice president of america
of course has achieved something really
quite historic
uh and uh the promises um talked about
all the range of areas
uh where we have our uh we're able to
work with with the us where we have our
special relationships
one of those of course is climate uh
where the
uh the biden uh uh team has said
uh that uh they will rejoin the paris
agreement
in terms of the focus of this government
as i've said to to dan hewitt at itv
our focus is singular our focus is
on protecting lives and livelihoods and
we will continue to do that
because that is what uh your viewers
expect of us
uh steve yeah so on the eu exit question
the nhs of course has been preparing for
eu exit for some time and we will
continue to
to make sure that we are uh prepared for
for various changes
on on the issue of procurement of
vaccine the secretary of state has
office of the government have been
handling the procurement issue so i i
might pass that back um on the
on the procurement issue but as i've
said earlier our job in the nhs
is uh to be ready to deploy the vaccine
and frankly get it into people's arms
uh and do that as quickly as we can and
that's what our focus is
uh on at the moment yeah um uh so i
think sam just on procurement to say
that um
i think in in really very fast pace
the vaccine task force has secured 350
million
vaccines across six of the most
promising vaccine candidates you've seen
as i said
uh the uh the uh news that's come out
about
pfizer biontech and of course uh you
know let's see what happens with the
rest
of the the vaccine portfolio uh we've
got uh astrazeneca
uh the oxford astrozenica uh vaccine as
well which is in
phase three trials but you know we have
we have some uh cautious hope now but i
think as professor powers have said is
that
we all still need to do the basics which
is observe the rules and the guidance
thank you very much sam for your
question we now go to jane
americ at the eye jane hi hello thank
you and first of all to the secretary of
state
today a new study by the london school
of hygiene and tropical medicine
shows increasing public concern about a
vaccine partly due to misinformation
campaigns by anti-vaxxers
54 percent of people say they would
definitely have a vaccine and this has
fallen from 60
do you accept that the government has a
problem with its pandemic communication
strategy
which is perhaps exemplified by the
disarray inside downing street
and secondly to professor powers the
react study today by imperial shows that
prevalence is still very high
in the north northwest at the start of
november and of course the north west
were the places that had tier three from
the middle of october do you think this
shows the tiering system wasn't enough
to press down on those infections thank
you
uh jane thank you very much for that um
so can i just say that uh
of course um you know it's been a very
long uh eight months since the start of
this pandemic uh and it's a global
pandemic it's something that's faced
every single government uh across uh the
world
and of course uh as i said our focus has
been to get support
uh to to individual support to
businesses and we've done that and
you've seen
uh as a result of uh the the work we've
done in communicating this
uh we've uh made sure that uh lots and
lots of businesses
across the country have taken up uh that
support
and in terms of of vaccines
uh of course i think it's very good news
that we have
around 300 000 people now participating
in these trials we will continue
uh to communicate uh with people on the
issue of vaccines and then i think as
a professor power said we will in due
course set out uh
the plan for deployment itself so i
think
it's it's of course important that uh we
continue to get the messages out
but i do think at this to this point we
have managed to do that
uh we'll say anything uh uh
on the question of tiering tearing so
i'm confident that the
tier system had an effect on the
transmission of the virus and the number
of infections in the community
and i'm sure that tier three had a
greater effect than tier one that had a
greater effect than tier one
of course it's important to remember
that that tier three
uh had a number of different ways in
which that could be applied
but if you look in liverpool for example
i can certainly say from the nhs point
of view
we are beginning to see some of the
effects of tier three and we're
beginning to see that the number of
patients for instance
in liverpool university hospitals with
covid is now less than it was a week ago
we will not see the benefit to the nhs
in terms of patients in hospital
of the national restrictions that would
put in place last thursday
until into next week because there is a
two-week lag
between people getting infected
developing symptoms and getting admitted
to hospital but
some of the effects that we're seeing in
the merseyside at the moment
will have been the result of tier three
but it's important that we don't just
plateau at a high level
it's important that infection rates go
down so
stabilizing r around one is
is helpful but it really needs to get
below one
and that is what the current uh national
restrictions are designed to do
we will see over the course of the next
weeks uh how that
plays through uh but um as i say in the
northwest i think
we are seeing some of the effects of the
tier three uh
measures that were put in place uh in
merseyside great
thank you so much jane for your question
are we now going to a hall at the
express
mesa thank hello thank you secretary of
state
a question to you both about the hopeful
vaccine
um have there been any discussions
within the government about the
possibility of compulsory
vaccination as was used in this country
against
small pots for many years and what work
has been done if any
on creating a certification system to
ensure that people can prove that
they've had the jab
um thank you uh mason for that question
so i i think that the first issue of
course is to make sure that
we have vaccine doses which are safe and
available
and we're absolutely clear that whilst
the work on vaccines has gone at
quite some pace these vaccines will only
be deployed
if they are safe and the efficacy is is
there
um as i said the independent
jcvi has actually sort of set out a
tiering of who should get this this
vaccine first
and that is the process that we're going
to follow
going forward so i think i don't want to
sort of jump ahead here i mean i think
the key thing first
is that we need to get a vaccine we need
to make sure
uh that it's got the efficacy that's
required it's safe
and then of course we will follow the
advice that we get from the scientists
and the experts
yes so uh so yes i think as i said
earlier
we are good at vaccination in this
country in fact we have
some of the highest vaccination rates in
the world our flu
vaccination program uh each winter
vaccinates large
uh proportion of the at-risk population
and and this year for instance
we are further ahead in terms of the
proportion of
at-risk people who've been vaccinated
for flu than we were
last year so so that gives me confidence
that the public
does have confidence in the vaccination
program and will come forward
for a vaccine to protect their health
and protect others as they are doing
with flu this year
flu vaccines covered vaccines any
vaccine goes through regulatory
processes
it will not be deployed unless the
relevant regulatory bodies
are sure that it is effective and it is
safe
that will occur this time round as it
does every time round
but i'm confident that the british
people
will want to be vaccinated that they
will understand the benefits not just
for themselves but
for everybody because it's by
vaccinating by getting high rates of
vaccination that we all protect each
other
great thank you very much uh miss for
your question the final question from
the media comes from emily ashton
at bloomberg emily hi hello and my first
question is to professor powers
um alex sharma has just confirmed that
lockdown will end
and when the restrictions when the
regulations come to an end on december
the second
do you think that is the right thing to
do given the rising cases
or do we need longer to get out of to
get on top of this
and a question for the secretary of
state it wasn't clear from your earlier
answers
and can you categor categorically say
that the supply of
vaccine won't be affected by brexit
disruption
so on the first point um clearly when we
come out of lockdown
in december and of course that is quite
rightly a matter for
our elected representatives we will not
going back
not be going back completely to normal
there will need to be other measures in
place
because while this virus is still here
we need to ensure that
infection rates stay as low as possible
and that we reduce the
chance of transmission exactly what
those measures are i think it's too
early to say yet
we're only one week into this four week
lockdown
we need to see what transpires over the
next few weeks
and i'm sure as it comes up to early
december
government as well scientists will be
looking at the data
over the weeks in november and then
considering what the best
menu of measures will be going into
december but ultimately of course that
quite rightly is a decision for
government
uh emily uh thank you for that uh let me
take your your question on supply chains
of course
uh you know this is an issue i mean
you've talked about vaccines but supply
chains obviously is a
issue across many sectors
but that is precisely why we have been
investing
hundreds of millions of pounds in terms
of border infrastructure we've been
investing in
grants for customs intermediaries it's
why we're making a very big effort
to communicate with businesses to make
sure that they are ready so they can get
customs clearances done
all of that work is ongoing um if we all
get prepared
we will be in absolutely the right place
post transition but the key message that
i want to leave for businesses
is that whatever deal we end up in terms
of our future relationship with the eu
there will be changes for business and
businesses do need to be prepared so
please have a look
uh go onto the websites please have a
look at the information that
the business department indeed other
departments in in the government
are setting out to you and we are there
to help so people need to get in contact
with us
uh they should absolutely do so uh thank
you very much emily i think that brings
us to the end
of this press conference could i end by
uh thanking
everyone who is watching this press
conference for absolutely everything
they are doing
uh to keep their families their loved
ones and themselves saved throughout
this process
and please observe the rules and
guidance hands
face space and i hope
that if people do that then we will beat
this thing down
and we will be coming out of the
national restrictions on the 2nd of
december thank you
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news